[RFC-0003] Flux OCI support for Kubernetes manifests (#2601)
fluxcd/flux2: rfcs/kubernetes-oci/README.md

they do today for container images.

### Goals

- Add support to the Flux CLI for packaging Kubernetes manifests and related configs into OCI artifacts.
- Add support to Flux source-controller for fetching configs stored as OCI artifacts.
- Make it easy for users to switch from Git repositories and Buckets to OCI repositories.

### Non-Goals

- Introduce a new OCI media type for artifacts containing Kubernetes manifests.

## Proposal

### Push artifacts

Flux users should be able to package a local directory containing Kubernetes configs into a tarball
and push the archive to a container registry as an OCI artifact.

```sh
flux push artifact docker.io/org/app-config:v1.0.0 -f ./deploy
```

Flux CLI with produce artifacts of type `application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json`.
The directory pointed to by `-f` is archived and compressed in the `tar+gzip` format
and the layer media type is set to `application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar+gzip`.

> A proof-of-concept CLI implementation for distributing Kubernetes configs as OCI artifacts
> is available at [kustomizer.dev](https://github.com/stefanprodan/kustomizer).

### Pull artifacts

> Flux users should be able to define a source for pulling manifests inside the cluster from an OCI repository.

Author: If we reuse the ORAS implementation from RFC #2597, we will only look at the first layer.

> Flux users should be able to define a source for pulling manifests inside the cluster from an OCI repository.

Author: Maybe @souleb can say more about it, he did implemented this RFC for experimentation purposes with ORAS.

```yaml
apiVersion: source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
kind: OCIRepository
metadata:
  name: app-config
  namespace: flux-system
spec:
  interval: 10m
  url: docker.io/org/app-config
  ref:
    tag: v1.0.0
```

An `OCIRepository` can refer to an artifact by tag, digest or semver range:

```yaml
spec:
  ref:
    # one of
    tag: "latest"
    digest: "sha256:45b23dee08af5e43a7fea6c4cf9c25ccf269ee113168c19722f87876677c5cb2"
    semver: "6.0.x"
```

To verify the authenticity of an artifact, the Sigstore cosign public key can be supplied with:

```yaml
spec:
  verify:
    provider: cosign
    secretRef:
      name: cosign-key
```

### Pull artifacts from private repositories

For authentication purposes, Flux users can choose between supplying static credentials with Kubernetes secrets
and cloud-based OIDC using an IAM role binding to the source-controller Kubernetes service account.

For private repositories hosted on DockerHub, GitHub, Quay, self-hosted Docker Registry and others,
the credentials can be supplied with:

```yaml
spec:

>   secretRef:

Reviewer: I think a `ServiceAccount` resource can be referenced here, in addition to `secretRef` to access registry credentials. Can the spec look something like this?
```yaml
spec:
  auth:  
    # one of
    secretRef:
      name: regcred
    serviceAccountName: reg
  certSecretRef: regcert
```

Author: Maybe in the next iteration of the source API `v1beta3`, right now all APIs have `secretRef` in `spec`. If we want to get this into Flux before GA, then we need to conform to the current API standard.

Reviewer: Sure, we can iterate on this in `v1beta3` and keep it as a suggestion.

Reviewer: @stefanprodan does it make sense to add `spec.serviceAccountName` in this API proposal?

Author: We need to add it to ImageRepository first, could you contribute that to image reflector?

Reviewer: Yes @stefanprodan I can add `spec.serviceAccountName` in `ImageRepository` v1beta1 API and implement it in `image-reflector-controller`.  I will put up a PR for the `image-reflector-controller` in the next few days. That said, if you accept the `spec.serviceAccountName` for `OCIRepository` contingent on the PR for the `ImageRepository`, that will be great.

Author: Yeap I think `serviceAccountName` is a great addition to both image and source APIs, for consistency sake, we'll need this into image v1beta1 API. Thanks for your help.

Reviewer: @stefanprodan logged an enhancement to include `ServiceAccountName` for `ImageRepository` v1beta1 API in image reflector controller https://github.com/fluxcd/image-reflector-controller/issues/251. I will submit the PR for [#251](https://github.com/fluxcd/image-reflector-controller/issues/251) by next week.

Author: I've added `serviceAccountName` to the proposal, thanks @rashedkvm for the IRC PR.

    name: regcred
```

The `secretRef` points to a Kubernetes secret in the same namespace as the `OCIRepository`,
the secret type must be `kubernetes.io/dockerconfigjson`.

> 

Reviewer: One small suggestion. In addition to the repository credentials, an optional secret ref with certificate data is necessary, especially for registries with a self-signed certificate or certificate issued by a non-public CA. This optional field can be similar to `CertSecretRef` defined in type `ImageRepositorySpec`

```
        // CertSecretRef can be given the name of a secret containing
	// either or both of
	//
	//  - a PEM-encoded client certificate (`certFile`) and private
	//  key (`keyFile`);
	//  - a PEM-encoded CA certificate (`caFile`)
	//
	//  and whichever are supplied, will be used for connecting to the
	//  registry. The client cert and key are useful if you are
	//  authenticating with a certificate; the CA cert is useful if
	//  you are using a self-signed server certificate.
	// +optional
	CertSecretRef *meta.LocalObjectReference `json:"certSecretRef,omitempty"`
```

Author: I've added `certSecretRef` to the spec. Thanks!

```yaml
spec:
  ref:
    # one of
    tag: "latest"
    digest: "sha256:45b23dee08af5e43a7fea6c4cf9c25ccf269ee113168c19722f87876677c5cb2"
    semver: "6.0.x"
```

To verify the authenticity of an artifact, the Sigstore cosign public key can be supplied with:

```yaml
spec:
  verify:
    provider: cosign
    secretRef:
      name: cosign-key
```

### Pull artifacts from private repositories

For authentication purposes, Flux users can choose between supplying static credentials with Kubernetes secrets
and cloud-based OIDC using an IAM role binding to the source-controller Kubernetes service account.

#### Basic auth

For private repositories hosted on DockerHub, GitHub, Quay, self-hosted Docker Registry and others,
the credentials can be supplied with:

```yaml
spec:
  secretRef:
    name: regcred
```

The `secretRef` points to a Kubernetes secret in the same namespace as the `OCIRepository`,
the secret type must be `kubernetes.io/dockerconfigjson`:

```shell
kubectl create secret docker-registry regcred \
  --docker-server=<your-registry-server> \
  --docker-username=<your-name> \
  --docker-password=<your-pword>
```

> For image pull secrets attached to a service account, the account name can be specified with:

Reviewer: Thank you @stefanprodan. If you are ok with the OCIRepository API proposed, I am ready start implementation.

## Motivation

Given that OCI registries are evolving into a generic artifact storage solution,
we should extend Flux to allow fetching Kubernetes manifests and related configs
from container registries similar to how Flux works with Git and Bucket storage.

With OCI support, Flux users can automate artifact updates to Git in the same way
they do today for container images.

### Goals

- Add support to the Flux CLI for packaging Kubernetes manifests and related configs into OCI artifacts.
- Add support to Flux source-controller for fetching configs stored as OCI artifacts.
- Make it easy for users to switch from Git repositories and Buckets to OCI repositories.

### Non-Goals

- Introduce a new OCI media type for artifacts containing Kubernetes manifests.

## Proposal

### Push artifacts

Flux users should be able to package a local directory containing Kubernetes configs into a tarball
and push the archive to a container registry as an OCI artifact.

```sh
flux push artifact docker.io/org/app-config:v1.0.0 \
  --path="./deploy" \
  --source="$(git config --get remote.origin.url)" \
  --revision="$(git branch --show-current)/$(git rev-parse HEAD)"
```

> The Flux CLI with produce artifacts of type `"application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Flux CLI will produce artifacts of type `"application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json`
```

```json
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json",
  "annotations": {
    "source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/url": "https://github.com/org/app.git",
    "source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/revision": "main/450796ddb2ab6724ee1cc32a4be56da032d1cca0"
  }
}
```

To ease the promotion workflow of a specific version from one environment to another, the CLI
should offer a tagging command.

```sh
flux tag artifact docker.io/org/app-config:v1.0.0 --tag=latest --tag=production
```

To help inspect artifacts, the Flux CLI will offer a `build` and a `pull` command for generating
tarballs locally and for downloading the tarballs from remote container registries.

> A proof-of-concept CLI implementation for distributing Kubernetes configs as OCI artifacts
> is available at [kustomizer.dev](https://github.com/stefanprodan/kustomizer).

### Pull artifacts

Flux users should be able to define a source for pulling manifests inside the cluster from an OCI repository.

```yaml
apiVersion: source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
kind: OCIRepository
metadata:
  name: app-config
  namespace: flux-system
spec:
  interval: 10m

>   url: docker.io/org/app-config

Reviewer 3: What is the intent for the `url` field? I find it a bit confusing for the value to not be a url, or in many cases to not even url-like (e.g. `ubuntu` for library images, or `user/repo` for docker hub images).

I see that the `GitRepository` and `HelmRepository` resources both use `url`, but in those cases the value actually is a URL. In the helm case, it may use the http(s) or oci scheme, but the oci scheme is not used in the `OCIRepository` examples. There was a concern raised about a custom OCI artifact media types not being registered with IANA; the `oci` scheme is also [not registered](https://www.iana.org/assignments/uri-schemes/uri-schemes.xhtml).

The `ImageRepository` resource uses `image` which is what I would tend to expect. 

The behavior isn't called out, but I would expect a user to be able to specify a tag or digest as part of the image and optionally override that value with the `ref` struct. Is that the intent?

Author: Thanks @scothis for raising this, I think I've addressed your comments in the latest commit.

Reviewer 3: > `repository` or `image` would make it more domain specific. The reason I'm even considering `image` is because I've observed that some providers change the meaning of registry and repositories.

If the field is called `image`, I would expect a full image reference including a tag or digest to work. This would make the `ref` field an optional override of the tag/digest on the `image`. I appreciate that two ways to define the same concept may be confusing. While `image` is my preferred field name (with the semantics), I suggested `repository` as a compromise between something that is not a URL nor a full image reference.

Author: Using `repository` feels redundant, the kind is called `OCIRepository`. Maybe we should follow Helm and enforce `oci://` in the `url` field in the same way we do for Flux `HelmRepository.spec.url`.

Author: I have added the `oci://` prefix to the API `spec.url` and to all the `flux <verb> artifact` commands. Thanks everyone for the feedback.

```

Then define an `OCIRepository` to fetch and verify the latest app config version:

```yaml
apiVersion: source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
kind: OCIRepository
metadata:
  name: app-config
  namespace: default
spec:
  interval: 10m
  url: ghcr.io/org/my-app-config
  ref:
    semver: "1.x"
  secretRef:
    name: my-app-regcred
  verify:
    provider: cosign
    secretRef:
      name: my-app-cosgin-key
```

And finally, create a Flux Kustomization to reconcile the app on the cluster:

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
kind: Kustomization
metadata:
  name: app
  namespace: default
spec:
  interval: 10m
  sourceRef:
    kind: OCIRepository
    name: app-config
  path: ./deploy
  prune: true
  wait: true
  timeout: 2m
```

### Alternatives

An alternative solution is to introduce an OCI artifact type especially made for Kubernetes configuration.
That is considered unpractical, as introducing an OCI type has to go through the
IANA process and Flux is not the owner of those type as Helm is for Helm artifact for example.

## Design Details

Both the Flux CLI and source-controller will use the [go-containerregistry](https://github.com/google/go-containerregistry)

> library for OCI operations such as push, pull, tag, list tags, etc.

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's intentionally written this way, but I noticed that some of these commands have not been described in the above sections like `pull`, ` list tags` and `build`. Would it be good to describe them to provide some examples of what to expect from them or in the workflows like in the user stories?

how OCI artifacts are pulled from container registries and how the artifact's authenticity can be verified.
Flux should be able to work with any type of artifact even if it's not created with the Flux CLI.

## Motivation

Given that OCI registries are evolving into a generic artifact storage solution,
we should extend Flux to allow fetching Kubernetes manifests and related configs
from container registries similar to how Flux works with Git and Bucket storage.

With OCI support, Flux users can automate artifact updates to Git in the same way
they do today for container images.

### Goals

- Add support to the Flux CLI for packaging Kubernetes manifests and related configs into OCI artifacts.
- Add support to Flux source-controller for fetching configs stored as OCI artifacts.
- Make it easy for users to switch from Git repositories and Buckets to OCI repositories.

### Non-Goals

- Introduce a new OCI media type for artifacts containing Kubernetes manifests.

## Proposal

### Push artifacts

Flux users should be able to package a local directory containing Kubernetes configs into a tarball
and push the archive to a container registry as an OCI artifact.

```sh

> flux push artifact oci://docker.io/org/app-config:v1.0.0 \

Author: This is not an option for us, Flux the CLI is following kubectl conventions and changing this means breaking all our users workflows.

# RFC-xxxx Flux OCI support for Kubernetes manifests

**Status:** provisional

**Creation date:** 2022-03-31

**Last update:** 2022-06-22

## Summary

Flux should be able to distribute and reconcile Kubernetes configuration packaged as OCI artifacts.

On the client-side, the Flux CLI should offer a command for packaging Kubernetes configs into
an OCI artifact and pushing the artifact to a container registry using the Docker config file
and the Docker credential helpers for authentication.

On the server-side, the Flux source-controller should offer a dedicated API Kind for defining
how OCI artifacts are pulled from container registries and how the artifact's authenticity can be verified.
Flux should be able to work with any type of artifact even if it's not created with the Flux CLI.

## Motivation

Given that OCI registries are evolving into a generic artifact storage solution,
we should extend Flux to allow fetching Kubernetes manifests and related configs
from container registries similar to how Flux works with Git and Bucket storage.

With OCI support, Flux users can automate artifact updates to Git in the same way

> they do today for container images.

Reviewer 4: > With OCI support, Flux users can automate artifact updates to Git in the same way
> they do today for container images.

Not sure I understand what workflow we are referring here. Is this referring to updating Git as in what IAC does. Or is this about using OCI to trigger source-controller updates, pretty much as SC does for GitRepository objects?

Author: It refers to IAC, where Flux patches the `spec.ref.tag` in the same way it does today for `images[].newTag`.

### Goals

- Add support to the Flux CLI for packaging Kubernetes manifests and related configs into OCI artifacts.
- Add support to Flux source-controller for fetching configs stored as OCI artifacts.
- Make it easy for users to switch from Git repositories and Buckets to OCI repositories.

### Non-Goals

- Introduce a new OCI media type for artifacts containing Kubernetes manifests.

## Proposal

### Push artifacts

Flux users should be able to package a local directory containing Kubernetes configs into a tarball
and push the archive to a container registry as an OCI artifact.

```sh
flux push artifact docker.io/org/app-config:v1.0.0 \
  --source="$(git config --get remote.origin.url)" \
  --revision="$(git branch --show-current)/$(git rev-parse HEAD)" \
  --path="./deploy"
```

> The Flux CLI will produce artifacts of type `application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json`

Reviewer 5: I think we should produce `application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json`, manifest types. This is supported by all major container registries, docker included, and is the only one currently registered: https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json

flux pull artifact docker.io/org/app-config:v1.0.0 --output ./manifests
```

### Pull artifacts

Flux users should be able to define a source for pulling manifests inside the cluster from an OCI repository.

```yaml
apiVersion: source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
kind: OCIRepository
metadata:
  name: app-config
  namespace: flux-system
spec:
  interval: 10m
  url: docker.io/org/app-config
  ref:
    tag: v1.0.0
```

The `spec.url` field points to the container image repository in the format `<host>:<port>/<org-name>/<repo-name>`. 
Note that specifying a tag or digest is not in accepted for this field. The `spec.url` value is used by the controller
to fetch the list of tags from the remote OCI repository.

An `OCIRepository` can refer to an artifact by tag, digest or semver range:

```yaml
spec:
  ref:
    # one of
    tag: "latest"
    digest: "sha256:45b23dee08af5e43a7fea6c4cf9c25ccf269ee113168c19722f87876677c5cb2"
    semver: "6.0.x"
```

To verify the authenticity of an artifact, the Sigstore cosign public key can be supplied with:

```yaml
spec:
  verify:
    provider: cosign
    secretRef:
      name: cosign-key
```

### Pull artifacts from private repositories

> For authentication purposes, Flux users can choose between supplying static credentials with Kubernetes secrets
> and cloud-based OIDC using an IAM role binding to the source-controller Kubernetes service account.

Reviewer 4: Cloud seems redudant here, as OIDC is not exclusive to it. Users could implement and use this in an airgapped/on-prem environment just as well.

```suggestion
For authentication purposes, Flux users can choose between supplying static credentials as Kubernetes secrets
or OIDC by using an IAM role binding to the source-controller Kubernetes service account.
```

  --docker-username=<your-name> \
  --docker-password=<your-pword>
```

For image pull secrets attached to a service account, the account name can be specified with:

```yaml
spec:
  serviceAccountName: regsa
```

#### Client cert auth

For private repositories which require a certificate to authenticate,
the client certificate, private key and the CA certificate (if self-signed), can be provided with:

```yaml
spec:
  certSecretRef:
    name: regcert
```

The `certSecretRef` points to a Kubernetes secret in the same namespace as the `OCIRepository`:

```shell
kubectl create secret generic regcert \
  --from-file=certFile=client.crt \
  --from-file=keyFile=client.key \
  --from-file=caFile=ca.crt
```

#### OIDC auth

When Flux runs on AKS, EKS or GKE, an IAM role (that grants read-only access to ACR, ECR or GCR)
can be used to bind the `source-controller` to the IAM role.

Similar to image-reflector-controller
[auto-login feature](https://fluxcd.io/docs/guides/image-update/#imagerepository-cloud-providers-authentication),
source-controller will expose dedicated flags for each cloud provider:

```sh
--aws-autologin-for-ecr
--azure-autologin-for-acr
--gcp-autologin-for-gcr
```

> We should extract the flags and the AWS, Azure and GCP auth implementations from image-reflector-controller into 

Reviewer 5: maybe move this to `design details` section?

> `fluxcd/pkg/oci/auth` to reuses the code in source-controller.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`fluxcd/pkg/oci/auth` to reuse the code in source-controller.
```

### Reconcile artifacts

The `OCIRepository` can be used as a drop-in replacement for `GitRepository` and `Bucket` sources.

> For example a Flux Kustomization can refer to an `OCIRepository` and reconcile the manifests found in the OCI artifact:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, a Flux Kustomization can refer to an `OCIRepository` and reconcile the manifests found in the OCI artifact:
```
